

Deploying Python Applications
=============================

This chapter will discuss how Python based web applications can be
deployed on Virtual Server infrastructure. This is a common mode of
deployment but also serves as a way of introducing virtualisation,
working with Linux and configuration of web servers.



Virtual Machines
----------------

Virtualisation refers to the creation of multiple virtual computers
running on one piece of hardware. One way to understand this is to think
of the Virtual Machine as a software emulation of a real CPU, memory and
disk running on another computer; for example, an Intel x86 based
computer could simulate an old Nintendo GameBoy to run games for that
platform. If the machine being emulated has the same architecture as the
one it is running on then the task should be easier. The CPU
instructions for the emulated machine translate directly to those for
the host machine. This is now such a common and desirable thing to do
that the CPU itself has support for running one or more virtual CPUs at
the same time and this is then supported by the operating system with
various kinds of support for running virtual machines efficiently.
Importantly, the Virtual Machine is isolated from the host machine so
that applications running on it cannot access host system resources and
two VMs running on the same host cannot interfere with each other.

All of the major operating systems (Windows, Mac, Linux) support running
virtual machines as a core part of the services that they provide.
However, to run a VM, we need an application that can coordinate the
services that are required. There are a number of products that do this:
in the commercial space [VMWare](http://www.vmware.com/) is a major
player and there are a few Open Source options, the most widely used of
which is [VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/) which is now owned by
Oracle. These applications do the job of managing all of the system
resources and providing the bridge between the virtual machine and the
host; for example, they can manage the network connection so that the VM
can connect to the Internet via the host or be isolated from it. In this
chapter we'll discuss examples with VirtualBox, but most should also
work under other VM applications.

VirtualBox is a desktop application that coordinates the creation and
running of virtual machines. It has versions for all major operating
systems that run on the x86 and AMD64/Intel64 architectures. When you
create a VM with VirtualBox you get a virtual computer that will start
up just like a real one. When it is first created, there is no operating
system installed, so the first task is to select a target operating
system and install it into the VM. While it is possible to install
Windows or MacOS into the VM (if you have the appropriate licence) we
will concentrate on the Linux operating system. I won't go into the
detail of the process of installation here - there are many guides
available online. Once an operating system is installed, the virtual
machine can be started and runs like a real computer, except that all
parts of it are emulated on the host machine. The display of the VM is
shown in a window on the desktop of the host; the mouse and keyboard
from the host are routed to the VM when the window is active.

A configured VM in VirtualBox is stored as two separate files. The first
is the `.vbox` file that contains the configuration of the machine, the
second has the extension `.vdi` and is a disk image that contains the
data that is stored on the virtual hard-drive for the VM. Since these
are just files on the host system, they can be copied and shared. This
makes it possible for me to create a VM image with a particular
configuration and then publish it so that others can use the same
configuration. This turns out to be a very useful way of distributing
demonstration or development versions of some software packages since
one of the big issues with complex software is getting it to run in the
wide variety of environments that are out in the real world.
Distributing a VM image means that you can install and test the software
in a known environment and publish that for your users to test or use as
a development environment.

Since distributing VM images is so easy there are many sites around the
web that offer a range of pre-built images for download. Of course one
of the issues with this is the possibility that the image you download
may have some mal-ware installed alongside the legitimate software that
it advertises. For this reason you should be careful about downloading
pre-built images unless you can be sure that the source is legitimate.
The safest option is always to make a new VM and install an operating
system obtained from a trusted source.

<div class="figure">

![Screenshot of a running VirtualBox VM](virtualbox-running.png)
Screenshot of VirtualBox running a Linux VM



When we start up a VM having installed the Linux operating system,
VirtualBox presents us with a window that simulates the screen of the
machine. Since we've installed a basic version of the operating system,
this screen is just an old fashioned character based console - no window
system or fancy user interface. Of course it is possible to install a
window system (X Windows for Linux) on the VM; VirtualBox would then
show us this running on an emulated graphics card inside the window on
the desktop. However, our interest in using VMs is related to running
web servers so window-based user interfaces are not an important part of
the system. Web servers are always remote systems - even if they are in
your organisation they will be downstairs in the machine room - so we
need to interact with them remotely. This means that we need to learn
about the command line and how to control a computer without a mouse or
visual user interface.





Working with a Linux VM
-----------------------

In this discussion I will assume that we are working with a version of
the [Ubuntu Linux](http://www.ubuntu.com/) operating system. Ubuntu is a
variant of the Debian version of Linux; there are many other versions
since Linux is really just the name of the OS kernel and this needs to
be packaged with other software to make a full Operating System.
Versions differ in the way that they are configured and the way that new
packages are installed.

As discussed above, when we run a VM in VirtualBox we see a console
where we can login (the login name and password are set during the
installation of the OS, if you downloaded an image they should be
supplied in the documentation for the image). Once logged in we see the
command prompt (in my case `webdev@ubuntu-webdev:~$`) and the system is
waiting for us to enter a command. This is a typical prompt on Ubuntu
that contains information about who you are (webdev), the machine you
are logged into (ubuntu-webdev) and your current working directory (\~
which is your home directory). The `$` character at the end is just a
traditional prompt character. This is described as the *shell* - that
is, the program that prints the prompt and accepts your command input is
called the shell. By default it will be a program called `bash` which
stands for [Bourne Again
Shell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bash_(Unix_shell)) (just a Unix
geek joke).

The main job of the shell from our point of view is to allow us to run
programs on the VM. In general you enter the name of a program and hit
return and it will be run. Arguments can be passed to the program.
Here's a simple example with the `ls` command that lists the files under
a directory (a directory is the linux term for what is normally called a
folder in Windows systems).

```
webdev@ubuntu-webdev:~$ ls /usr
bin   games  include  lib  local  sbin  share src
webdev@ubuntu-webdev:~$ ls -l /home
drwxr-xr-x 3 webdev webdev 4096 Aug 28 2015 webdev
     
```

In this example I've called the `ls` command with a single argument
which is the name of a directory (folder) on the machine. The response
is a printout of the names of the contents of that directory. In the
second example I've added the `-l` flag or option which ls interprets as
asking for a long-form listing of the contents. In this case I've listed
the `/home` directory which contains one entry; the details on that line
correspond to the permissions on the sub-directory, who owns it, when it
last changed and finally its name. Don't worry about interpreting this
just now, the main point is to illustrate running programs by typing
their name with options and arguments on the command line.

There is a lot to learn about the Linux shell, it can do a lot (it is in
fact a programming language in itself, you can write scripts in bash).
There is also a lot to learn about the standard commands (programs) that
are available on a Linux system - for example, programs to find things
in files, find files in the filesystem, sorting data, doing arithmetic
etc. I can't go into this here but would refer you to resources such as
[LinuxCommand.org](http://linuxcommand.org/) or [The Command Line Crash
Course](http://cli.learncodethehardway.org/book/). Note that you can use
your newly acquired shell skills on Windows and Mac systems too. MacOS
is based on Unix and every Mac has a Terminal program installed that
let's you interact with the command line. It is possible to install a
Bash shell on Windows and soon bash will be integrated into the Windows
Powershell for all Windows 10 users.





Creating a Web Server
---------------------

To turn our VM into a web server we need to install the relevant
software and then configure the VM so that we can connect to it from a
web browser on the host machine.

For this example we'll use the [nginx web server](http://nginx.org)
(pronounced 'engine x') since it is a very widespread modern server that
is a good choice for running Python based web applications. You may have
also heard of the [Apache](http://apache.org) web server which is the
most widely deployed server on the web. For our purposes these are very
similar but nginx wins out based on the simplicity of its configuration
and suitability for Python applications. However, as a web developer you
should learn about both (and other server options).

Installing software on the Ubuntu Linux system is very straighforward as
long as the application you want has been packaged for Ubuntu and is
present in the software catalogue. Ubuntu uses the program `apt-get` to
install and remove software. This program is able to search an online
catalogue for the application you want, download it and install it ready
to run.

Since the package I want to install is `nginx` I can go ahead and enter
the command to install it using `apt-get`:

```
$ apt-get install nginx
E: Could not open lock file /var/lib/dpkg/lock - open (13: Permission denied)
E: Unable to lock the administration directory (/var/lib/dpkg/), are you root?
     
```

Note that I'll use the shorter `$` prompt in examples from now on.

<div class="note">

`apt-get` is also used to keep your system up to date and install new
versions of packages if they have been released. You can run one command
to update the list of packages the system knows about:

```
$ sudo apt-get update
         
```

This should display a long list of status messages as it checks against
various online repositories for the latest versions of software. It is
sometimes necessary to do this before you can install any new software,
so if installing nginx fails, try doing this and then re-running the
nginx install.

To update the system to the latest versions of all installed programs
enter:

```
$ sudo apt-get upgrade
         
```

This will find which programs need updating, show you a list and ask if
you want to proceed. If you say yes, it will download the new versions
and install them in place of the old ones. If you are running a server
that is exposed to the Internet then it is very important that you do
this regularly to avoid security issues.



The result is an error message saying I don't have permission to do
this. The reason is that on a Linux system, a regular user doesn't have
permission to read and write system files. There is a special user
called 'root' (or the superuser) who is allowed to do this. This
protects the system from accidental or malicious damage. To actually
install software I need to login as the root user rather than `webdev`.
I could log out and log in again as root, but since it is quite common
to want to run commands as the root user, there is a short cut via the
`sudo` (superuser do) command:

```
$ sudo apt-get install nginx
[sudo] password for webdev:
     
```

The result here is that we are prompted for a password, if that matches
ok then the command is run as root and the package is installed. You
will be asked if you want to install various other applications that
nginx requires to run, you can just hit return to accept the default
response which is Y (yes).

If all goes well, you will now have nginx installed on your virtual
machine. The installation process also makes sure that the server is
running (and that it will re-start whenever you re-start your VM). By
default, it will listen for requests on the default port 80 and serve up
a single static page that has been installed along with the software.
However, since we don't have a web browser on the VM, we can't test
it...or can we?

In fact we can test it with a few different tools that are installed by
default in our VM. The easiest is probably `curl` which is a command
line tool to retrieve URLs. Since the server is running on the local
machine using port 80, the URL for the main page will be
`http://localhost/`. So, to get the page we enter:

```
$ curl http://localhost/
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
<title>Welcome to nginx!</title>
<style>
    body {
        width: 35em;
        margin: 0 auto;
        font-family: Tahoma, Verdana, Arial, sans-serif;
    }
</style>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Welcome to nginx!</h1>
<p>If you see this page, the nginx web server is successfully installed and
working. Further configuration is required.</p>

<p>For online documentation and support please refer to
<a href="http://nginx.org/">nginx.org</a>.<br/>
Commercial support is available at
<a href="http://nginx.com/">nginx.com</a>.</p>

<p><em>Thank you for using nginx.</em></p>
</body>
</html>
      
```

<div class="note">

The `sudo` command is an all powerful tool - take care when using it!

[![XKCD sudo cartoon](http://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/sandwich.png) Source:
XKCD](https://xkcd.com/149/)



So in my case it is working; nginx has served up the test page included
in the distribution. If you're trying this and it did not work then a
number of things could be the cause of the problem. Firstly, did you see
any error messages when you installed nginx - if so read these carefully
and try to work out what the issue is. Note the comment above about
running `apt-get update` to enable the system to find newer pacakges. If
all seemed to go well but it just doesn't work, you can check to see
that the server is running with the following command:

```
$ sudo service nginx status
      
```

This may report that nginx is running or not. You could try restarting
it with the command:

```
$ sudo service nginx restart
      
```

If this doesn't fix the problem then the best option is to search the
web for possible solutions - this is reasonably effective if you have an
error message generated at some point in the process. Search for the
text of the error message - you are probably not alone in having this
problem.





Shared Folders
--------------

A useful feature of VirtualBox is the ability to share folders between
the host operating system (your laptop) and the VM. This means that you
can have the code of your Python application in a folder on your laptop
but then have the same directory available inside your VM. This saves
having to copy your code into the VM every time you want to test it. You
can edit in your favourite editor on your laptop and run the code from
inside the VM.

To achieve this we need to install what are called "Guest Additions" to
the target operating system. These are some extensions to the Linux
kernel that allow it to coordinate with the VirtualBox subsystem. They
also help with integrating the mouse and cursor and copying/pasting
between the host system and the VM. To do this take the following steps:

```
$ sudo apt-get install virtualbox-guest-utils
     
```

The next step is to set up a shared folder via the VirtualBox
application. From the menu select *Devices* and *Shared Folders* then
*Shared Folder Settings...*. In the settings pane create a new shared
folder via the + icon on the right. Enter `share` as the folder name
and select the directory containing your application source code for the
folder path. Make sure *Auto Mount* is checked and click Ok.

Another small change is to add our username on the VM to the special
group `vboxsf` so that we can get access to the shared folder contents.

```
$ sudo adduser webdev vboxsf
     
```

To have this all take effect, we need to reboot the virtual machine:

```
$ sudo reboot
     
```

Now, when you login to your machine you should be able to see the
contents of the folder on your host machine under `/media/sf_share`, eg.
using the `ls` command:

```
$ ls /media/sf_share
      
```

We can now move on to configuring the network on the VM in preparation
for getting our web application running.





Network Connection
------------------

The virtual machine is running inside a simulated environment where
system resources are presented to it through an emulation layer. By
default the VM you created will use Network Address Translation (NAT) to
connect its network to that of the host machine. This is the same
mechanism that your home router uses to allow you to share one IP
address between all of the machines on your home network. This works
well to allow the VM to connect to the outside network since traffic is
routed through the host machine's network connection automatically.

The main reason for setting up this VM is to allow us to run a web
server on the machine to test our web application in a realistic server
environemnt. To make this work we need to be able to access the network
ports on the VM from the host machine. By default, the VM doesn't have
an IP address that is visible from the host. The easiest way to get
network access to the machine is to set up a *port forwarding* rule on
the VM. This will connect a port on the VM with a port on the host.

To achieve this, while your VM is not running, look at the settings of
your VM in VirtualBox. Select the Networking tab and click on the
Advanced button, you should then see a Port Forwarding button. Clicking
this shows an interface that allows you to enter a new mapping. Here you
will enter a new rule to connect port 80 on the VM to a free port on the
host machine, eg:

    Name   Protocol   Host IP     Host Port   Guest IP   Guest Port
    ------ ---------- ----------- ----------- ---------- ------------
    HTTP   TCP        127.0.0.1   8500                   80

This rule will forward traffic form port 80 on the VM to port 8500 on
the host machine's 127.0.0.1 IP address (8500 is just an unused port
number). This means that the nginx web server that we configured to
listen to port 80 will be accessible via the url
`http://127.0.0.1:8500/` on the host machine.

The same method could be used to set up rules for other ports. If you
want to be able to use ssh to connect to the VM as you would a remote
machine you can connect the ssh port (22) to a free port (eg. 2222) on
the host and then use an ssh client (e.g. Putty on Windows or the ssh
command on Mac) to connect to 127.0.0.1:2222. Accessing your VM using
ssh is a good idea because it will familiarise you with the way that you
would access a remote server. The interface is the same command line
prompt but you will be typing commands into a terminal window (or a
Putty window) on your host machine rather than into the VirtualBox
emulator window.





Serving a Python Application
----------------------------

The overall goal of this chapter is to show how to configure a Linux
server to run a Python web application in a way that mirrors a
real-world deployment. So far we have a running nginx web server and
we're able to connect to it from the host machine. The server is
configured to serve static pages; the next task is to get the Python web
application to run inside the VM, we will then connect it to the nginx
server to complete the task.

### Install Bottle

Python version 3 is installed by default in the Ubuntu system but we
need to install the Bottle module with the command:

```
$ sudo apt-get install python3-bottle
    
```

(note that you could also install bottle using the Python package
manager `pip`, on Ubuntu, using `apt-get` is a good idea because it can
also be used to upgrade packages easily as security patches are
released).

### A Sample Application

As a sample application for deployment I will use a version of the AJAX
list maker project from [chapter on AJAX](../javascript/ajax.md). This makes
use of a simple SQLite database and has a few resources that are served
as static files (Javascript, stylesheet and an image). You can download
these here:

-   [jsonlikes.py](code/jsonlikes.py)
-   [database.py](code/database.py)
-   [views/jsonlikes.tpl](code/views/jsonlikes.tpl)
-   [static/likes.js](code/static/likes.js)
-   [static/style.css](code/static/style.css)
-   [static/logo.png](code/static/logo.png)

or as a single zip file [jsonlikes.zip](code/jsonlikes.zip).

If you are following along with this exercise you could download these
files and copy them to a the shared folder that you set up earlier on
your machine or choose a project of your own to deploy. Be sure to get
the directory structure right for these files with the views and static
files in a subdirectory relative to the two Python files. Test the
application by running it as usual through PyCharm (or however you
usually run your Python applications).

### Running the Application

Inside the VM we can now run the Python application. The easiest way to
do this is to change our working directory to the shared folder
(`/mnt/sf_share`) and run the application from the command line using
the Python interpreter. This can be done as follows:

```
$ cd /media/sf_share
$ python3 jsonlikes.py
    
```

You should see the familiar output of the Bottle development server
indicating that it is listening on port 8080 for HTTP traffic:

```
$ python3 jsonlikes.py
Bottle v0.12.8 server starting up (using WSGIRefServer(restart=True))...
Listening on http://127.0.0.1:8080/
Hit Ctrl-C to quit.
    
```

If you get this message then it looks like the application is working
but again we face the problem that we can't test it. Even worse than
with nginx, we can't even use `curl` to test it because it's taken over
the command line - we can't run commands while it is running the server.
To get around this we will run the server as a *background process*
which means that it will run but will not take over the command line. To
do this we do two things on the command line. The first is to redirect
the output that the server produces to a file; this is done by
redirecting the output to the file `web.log` using the `&>` directive.
The second is to indicate that we would like to run the process in the
background by adding `&` to the end of the command line.

```
$ python3 jsonlikes.py &> web.log &
[1] 1204
    
```

The output produced by the command is in two parts, the first number in
square brackets indicates that this is the first background process I
have running in this shell. The second is the system process id number.
Take note of these as we'll use them later to kill the server process.

We can now use `curl` once again to test that the server is working.
This time the server is listening on port 8080 so the command is:

```
$ curl http://localhost:8080/
    
```

You should see some HTML output if all is working well. If you are
running the `jsonlikes.py` application linked above, you could also try
the /likes URL which returns a JSON list of the current set of likes:

```
$ curl http://localhost:8080/likes
    
```

Once we have verified that this works we can halt the server by stopping
the python process. To do this we need the numbers that were printed out
when we ran the server earlier. The easiest option is to use the first
number, which is usually 1 if you are just running one server process.
We use the kill command to send a SIGINT interrupt signal to the
process:

```
$ kill -SIGINT %1
    
```

The alternative is to use the process number:

```
$ kill -SIGINT 1204
    
```

<div class="note">

The Bottle server we are running here is not meant for a real
deployment, it is only intended as a development server for very
lightweight use. It can only cope with one request at a time and so
would fail under any kind of load from the web. In a real production
situation you would use a real application server such as
[gunicorn](http://gunicorn.org/) or
[uWSGI](https://uwsgi-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/). Both of these are
Python specific application servers that can run your Bottle application
in a way that is more robust and able to handle real traffic. For
example, they will run more than one worker thread to handle multiple
requests at once. You should experiment with these servers to learn more
about a complete Python application deployment environment.



Both should have the effect of stopping the process and printing a
message to that effect. Now that the process is stopped we can examine
the log file `web.log` that should contain the output of the server when
we made the requests. Use the `cat` command to show the file contents:

```
$ cat web.log
Bottle v0.12.7 server starting up (using WSGIRefServer(restart=True))...
Listening on http://127.0.0.1:8080/
Hit Ctrl-C to quit.

127.0.0.1 - - [25/May/2016 02:00:32] "GET / HTTP/1.1" 200 692
127.0.0.1 - - [25/May/2016 02:00:35] "GET /likes HTTP/1.1" 200 36
/usr/lib/python3/dist-packages/bottle.py:3116: ResourceWar...
    
```

(The last line is just an error message generated when we stopped the
server.)

At the end of this section, we now have a running web application on the
VM that is listening to port 8080 and serving pages. However this isn't
connected to the outside world since we only connected the real HTTP
port (80) to our local network. We have the `nginx` server running and
listening to port 80 but only serving static files. The next part of the
puzzle is to connect these two together.

Note that `nginx` can't directly run Python programs so we can't run our
application directly. `nginx` will act as a *proxy server*, accepting
requests on port 80 from the outside world and forwarding them to our
running Python server on port 8080.





nginx Configuration
-------------------

nginx is a web server but is particularly focussed on providing a
front-end server that can efficiently accept requests and forward them
to one or more back-end services. This is known as a *reverse proxy* and
is one of the ways of making web services more robust and able to handle
larger volumes of traffic. We will configure nginx here to pass requests
on to our Python web application listening on port 8080.

The nginx configuration is held in the directory `/etc/nginx/` (you will
find the configuration of most services on your Linux server in the
`/etc` directory). We will look at the configuration found in
`/etc/nginx/sites-available/default` which is the default configuration
that comes with the package. The default configuration contains a lot of
comments but the core configuration is as follows:

```
server {
        listen 80 default_server;
        listen [::]:80 default_server;

        root /var/www/html;

        # Add index.php to the list if you are using PHP
        index index.html index.htm index.nginx-debian.html;

        server_name _;

        location / {
                # First attempt to serve request as file, then
                # as directory, then fall back to displaying a 404.
                try_files $uri $uri/ =404;
        }
}
    
```

In this configuration, the server is told to listen to the default port
80 and serve static files from the directory `/var/www/html`. The
location part defines the handling of all URLs starting with `/`, in
this case serving static files or directory listings.

Instead of this configuration we want to have all requests for URLs
starting with `/` forwarded to our Python web application listening on
port 8080. This is done with the `proxy_pass` directive as follows:

```
server {
    listen 80 default_server;
    listen [::]:80 default_server;

    root /var/www/html;

    server_name _;

    location / {
        proxy_pass http://localhost:8080;
    }
}
    
```

To create this configuration you need to modify the
`/etc/nginx/sites-available/default` file. The easy way to do this is to
save the above text in a file in your shared directory and then inside
the VM, copy the file to the nginx directory:

```
$ sudo cp /media/sf_share/default /etc/nginx/sites-available/default
    
```

We need to use `sudo` here because ordinary users are not allowed to
modify these configuration files.

We also need to make sure that the file has the permissions to be read
by any user. To ensure this, we can use
`sudo chmod a+r /etc/nginx/sites-available/default`, which means "enable
read permission to all users". You can then check that the permissions
are correct by typing `ls -l /etc/nginx/sites-available/default` and
observe the result. There should be three `r` on the left-hand side of
the listing of the file:

    total 4
    -rwxr-xr-- 1 root root 163 May 27 10:28 default
        

The above example also says that the file can be written by the root
(the first `w`) and can be executed by the user root and the user group
associated with the root (the two `x`).

The alternative way to modify the configuration is to use an editor on
the VM itself. The standard text editor on a Linux server is `vi` and
most people will find it very confusing. However, if you are going to be
working with remote servers it is a good idea to have at least a basic
familiarity with `vi` to allow you to make quick changes to files. There
are a number of tutorials on the web that will help you learn about
`vi`, e.g. [from Gentoo](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Vim/Guide), [from
WikiBooks](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Learning_the_vi_Editor), [from
IBM](http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/library/l-lpic1-v3-103-8/).

Once the new version of the configuration file is in place we need to
restart the server configuration to have it take effect. Do this with
the following command:

```
$ sudo service nginx restart
    
```

To test this setup we can again use `curl` from inside the VM to access
the pages served by `nginx`:

```
$ curl http://localhost/
    
```

This should show the output generated by the Python application
(assuming it is still running in the background as established above).
If this doesn't work, check that the Python process is still running
(use `curl` again to access the server on port 8080). Look at any error
messages that you get when you get the pages with `curl`. You can also
see error messages in the `nginx` logs which are stored in
`/var/log/nginx/`. You can look at the contents of these files with the
`more` program, e.g.:

```
$ more /var/log/nginx/access.log
$ more /var/log/nginx/error.log
    
```

We are now ready to try to access our application from outside the VM.
If the network is configured for port forwarding as discussed above, the
`nginx` web server should be available at `http://localhost:8500` from
the host machine (your laptop). If this works then give a little cheer!
If not, check that your network port forwarding configuration is
correct.

### Serving Static Files with nginx

One final modification we can make to the configuration is to have
`nginx` take over the job of serving static files for our application.
Static files by definition do not change and there is no need to have
our Python script involved in serving them. `nginx` is good at serving
static content and can do it more efficiently that our Python server.

To enable this, we need to configure the URL `/static` to be served
directly through `nginx`, bypassing the Python server. Add the following
lines to the configuration after the existing location clause:

```
location /static {
    root /media/sf_share;
}
    
```

Since the files we want the server to access are stored on the shared
folder, we need to give it permission to do so. By default these files
are only readable by members of the `vboxsf` group, so we need to add
the user `www-data` to this group (the nginx server runs as this user).

```
$ sudo adduser www-data vboxsf
    
```

Restart the server again and check that the application is still working
- in particular that the static resources (stylesheet, javascript and
image files) are being served.





Summary
-------

This chapter has walked through the configuration of a Virtual Machine
based Linux web server for running a simple Python web application. The
example has been made as simple as possible but is typical of a real
configuration that might be used to serve a small web application. Part
of the motivation for this chapter is to introduce web development
students to the Unix command line and the basics of working with Unix
applications. The interested student should take this as a starting
point and explore further to learn to master the Unix environment.

There are still a few things to do before the configuration described
above is a realistic one. I'll note some here for completeness although
I won't go into detail.

-   Use a production database rather than SQLite. SQLite is fine for
    development and even for small scale services but a real deployment
    will make use of a database like Postgres or MySQL.
-   As mentioned above, the Python web application should be served
    using a server like gunicorn rather than the default Bottle
    development server.
-   Of course for a real deployment we won't run a VM on our own laptop
    but all of the same concepts apply to Virtual Machines provided by
    vendors such as Amazon (AWS), Microsoft (Azure) or Google
    (Cloud Platform).





[![Creative Commons
License](https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/4.0/88x31.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/)\
<span dct="http://purl.org/dc/terms/"
href="http://purl.org/dc/dcmitype/Text" property="dct:title"
rel="dct:type">Python Web Programming</span> by <span
cc="http://creativecommons.org/ns#" property="cc:attributionName">Steve
Cassidy</span> is licensed under a [Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International
License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/).
