

Web Usability
=============

There are many factors to consider in the design of a web-site or web
application. Some of these are related to the visual look and feel of
the pages - graphics, colours, fonts etc. To get these right you need
some knowledge of graphic design and an eye for current design trends.
However, a good web design is more than a visually appealing design; the
key is how the design helps or hinders the users interactions with the
site. A visually stunning design can be very difficult to use while a
very plain design can often make things very easy for the user. This
chapter examines the problem of building *usable* web designs.



Principles of Usability
-----------------------

A web application is an interactive experience. Even if the user is only
consuming content on a site (as opposed to filling out forms and
carrying out activities) they are interacting with the site to find the
content they want. Menus, icons, links and even simple text and images
are all interactive elements of the page and the design needs to take
their usability into account

So what is *usability*? If a web site is there to do a job, then a
usable website is one that makes it easy for the target user to do that
job. This can range from simply making sure that text on a site is
readable (fonts, colours, backgrounds) to having the right menu
structure and a page design that makes the content and purpose of the
website clear.





Visual Design
-------------

The visual design of a web site is a major part of the overall design
and presentation of a web development project. Organisations want a
design that is distinctive and appealing, one that fits with their
overall branding. It is important to make sure that purely visual design
considerations don't over-ride the usability design of the site.

**Consistent design** on all of the pages of the site helps the user to
understand that the site is a whole system and they are navigating
around it. If the menu layout changes on different pages or the site
design is suddenly quite different, they may conclude they have entered
a different site. Consistency is also important between sites - users
have certain expectations on how a website will look and behave from
their experience with other websites. If you are going to violate these
expectations with odd graphical layouts, then you need to be careful
that your users are not confused.

The use of graphics in a site design is important and can make the
difference between a very plain design and an appealing one. However,
the **graphics need to support the message and purpose of the site**
rather than conflicting with them or confusing the user. An example
would be a full-page graphic on the home page of a site that obscures
the links the user needs to find the content they are after.

The ability to place images in the background of a web page is quite
appealing to the novice designer who is new to CSS. Overlaying a recipe
on an image of the dish can look cool but it is very easy to end up with
an un-readable page. Avoid overlaying text on a busy image background. A
similar issue can arise by choosing foreground and background colours
that are close together. Generally, the designer needs to ensure that
there is sufficient **contrast between the text and the background**,
whether that is a plain colour or an image.





Meeting User Expectations
-------------------------

A user comes to your website with a set of expectations built up over
their entire web browsing experience. This will range from simple things
like understanding what a link is to the expectation that there will be
a search box or a Contact Us page on your site. They will also have
expectations relating to the kind of website they are visiting; on a
shopping site they will want to see products, prices and a shopping
cart; on a news site they want the latest stories to be obvious.

In the early days of the web, links were always coloured blue and turned
a darker purple colour if you had visited them. This is a useful cue to
the user that a link goes to a page they have seen, even if the text of
the link is different. Using CSS it is possible to change the colour of
links and to make visited links be just like new links. However, this
removes this information from the user interface and so may violate the
users expectations. In many cases you don't want to re-colour your links
- for example in your main menu it would look odd to have the menu
entries changing colour. However, there is an argument that within the
body of the text in your pages, you should maintain this new/visited
distinction.

Again on the topic of links, it is common to make page elements other
than regular links clickable in a page, either as links or as triggers
for actions. One problem with some designs is that these links don't
look anything like links to the user and they don't then know that they
can click on them. It is common to see designs where users click on all
sorts of graphics or text to see if they do what they want. The designer
must make it clear what is a link and what is not, if not using the
regular conventions, then by establishing some internally consistent
convention within the site. If you use graphic elements as buttons
instead of the default button widget, then it needs to be clear that it
is a button.





Usability Testing
-----------------

While we can read as much as possible about usability design, it is
never possible to anticipate all of the issues that will arise when real
users try to use our websites. For this reason, testing of websites with
target users is an important part of the design and development process.
A usability test is a simple task based test run with a group of users
taken from the target audience for a new site.

It is possible to run a usability test even before the site has been
implemented by using paper mock-ups of the pages that you propose using.
However, it is more usual to run a test once a functional version of the
site is available.

Tests are task-focussed. A group of users is recruited and given some
information about the site that they will be testing. Generally it will
be something they might have used in real life. They are then given one
or more scenarios that they are asked to complete. For example, on a
shop website they might be asked to find a particular product or to
choose a product that meets certain requirements. Once they have been
given the task, they are then observed as they try to complete it. They
will be asked to comment on what they are doing or trying to do as they
work through the task. These comments are recorded along with an image
of the screen, so that they can be analysed later.
